# EAS_585: Advance remote sensing

## Course modules

 1- Intro to field spectroscopy
 2- Image understanding: Passive systems
 3- Image understandig: Active systems
 4- Laser scanning
 5- RAPS/UAV

## A review of remote sensing

## Sensor classification

There is a classification based on energy resources and wavelength region.

**Energy resources** : 
 
 - Passive sensors: This ones just measure reflectance. 
 Some examples are NOAA, Sentinel 1.
 Negative side is that clouds can interfere with the methodology and measurements.

 - Active sensors: They emit a beam of light and measure houw much returned back.
 Some examples are Lidar, radarsat.

**Wavelength region**: 
 
 - Visible / reflectie infrared
 - Thermal infrared
 - Microwave

## Spatial resolution

Active and passive sensors have different spatial resolution. Spatial resolution is about how clear can you see the ground,or the object in the image.

An important concept is the **pure pixel**

A pure pixel can be a pixel that is composed almost everything by just one component, for example, a pixel that shows just a forest or just an urban area. This pure pixels are the ones that can tell to a computer the main characteristics of the object represented in there.

There is a phenomena that occurs with the pixel classification. This is because, given that the pure pixel can be a little bit combined (its classified as a forest but it has a small portion of urban area) we are going to have some bias in the classification. Although this approximation to the problem works. Nonetheles, there are other methodologies to create better classifications such as **pixel breakdown**.

## Temporal resolution

This is the amount of pictures in time that we can obtain from a certain place. The need for a bigger or a smaller scale of temporal resolution it's going to depend on the study. For example, agricultural landscapes will need a bigger temporal resolution (be able to detect changes in short periods of time) given that the changes in the landscape over time are very common. On the other side, geological studies commonly don't  need to have a detailed temporal resolution becauses changes are not that common. 

> On slide 7 in Lecture 1 there is graphic showing the relation between spatial and temporal resolution.

## Radiometric resolution

This is the sensitivity of a sensor, i.e. it's ability to measure and to enable distinction from the same spectral band of differences in the electromagnetic energy reflected by the elementary ground surfaces. 

For example, if we have an image with just 4 grey levels, the ability to distinguish between the objects in the surface is not much, but if the same image has 256 grey levels, objects in surface are better defined.

## Spectral resolution

The spectral response  which characterize the reflectance and/or emittance of a feature or target over a variety of wavelengths allows to distinguish between different classes or features and details in an image. The ability of a sensor to define fine wavelengths intervals is the spectral resolution. 

Different sensors have different abilities to define the wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum. 

This electromagnetic spectrum have known segments as for example the visible spectrum that goes from 400 to 700 nm in wavelength (0.4 um - 0.7 u). The infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum covers from from 1mm to 750 nm and can be divided in 3 parts:
 
 - Near infrared 2500 - 750 nm
 - Mid-infrared 10 - 2.5 um
 - Far infrared 1mm - 10 um

> During Lecture 2, we received the following electromagnetic spectrum classification:

 - Visible 0.4 - 0.7 nm
 - Reflective infrared 0.7 - 3.0 nm
 - Thermal infrared 3 - 14 nm


> On slide 10 in Lecture 1 there is an image of the electromagnetic spectrum. We can see that more wavelength less frequency.

## Spectral reflectance 

The spectral reflectance results from the presence or absence, as well as the position and shape of specific absorption features of the surface. With the sprectral reflectance, we can obtain the spectral signature of different elements in a surface, for example, soil, vegetation, minerals among others. 

When we have a figure with spectral signatures, we need to understand that when in the y-axis (reflectance) there is a decrease in the curve, its because of the aborbance of radiation. High points in the curve means that there is no absorption of radiation. Different elements will have different signatures and thats, in general terms, we can have an idea of the composition of the elements in a surface.

Another phenomena occurs when there is presence of water, given that this element have low levels (almost al the curve near 0) in the infreared spectrum.

The spectral scale goes from 0 to 1. 0 means black and 1 white


## Multispectral

Remote sensing systems can record energy over separate  wavelength ranges at various spectral resolutionsThis is over a variety of different wavelength ranges. Usually they scan 7 bands.

## Hyperspectral

Systems that are more advance than multispectral ones, can record **more that 7 bands**. So this systems have the capacity to detect hundreds of very narrow spectral bands throughout the visible, near-infrared and mid-infreared portions of the electromagnetic spectrum.


## Platforms: Satellite characteristics

There are two types of satellites according to it's orbits:

 - **High level**: ~36 000 km and geonsynchronous orbits (horizontal)
 - **Low earth orbit**: less than 1500 km and sunsynchronous orbits (vertical) 

## Passive sensing

 - Solar radiation is either reflected (VIS/NIR) or absorbed the reemitted (thermal IR)

One of the downsides of this methodology is that the presence of clouds in the image can interfere with the measurements.

When there are clouds, the term **diffuse light** is used.
When there are no clouds and the image is clear, the term **direct light** is used.

Problem with clouds is just not the space the occupy in the image (a loss of information in areas covered by clouds) but also the shadow they generate.

In order to consider a quality image, this one needs to have less than 20% of cloud coverage. When this is happening, i.e. a 20% of cloud coverage in the image represents a loss of information of more than 20% because there will be shadows.

## Active sensing

 - The sensor platform is the energy source as well as the measurement device.

This methodology does not works well when there is presence of water, i.e. wetlands or lakes. This is because water aborbs the radiation.

**Infrared radtion is aboserbed by water**

## Sensors examples

 - **Low resolution**: NOAA-AVHRR
 - **Medium resolution**: TERRA-MODIS
 - **High resolution**: Lansat, SPOT, Sentinel
 - **Very high resolution**: Iknos2, Quickbird2, Worldview2

> From slide 21 to slide 30 in lecture 1 there is a description of each of the sentinel satellites launched by ESA.


# Plants

## Spectral properties in plants

Three leaf components intercept most of the radiation:
 
 - Pigments
 - Leaf structure
 - Water content

## Reflectance and plants

On plant's spectral signatures we can see that there is peak around 550, that it's known as **green peak**

Around the 1400 values, curves tend to have low reflectance values which is due to the presence of water. If wee see the inverse tendency (high reflectance values) it's because leaves can be dry. So, there is a relation between the reflectance and the physiological state of plants.

 - **Reflectance + Transmission = 1**

 - If there is a body of water that appears to have absorption on the 0.4 - 0.7 um its probably due to the presence of algae.

 - If the soil is too dry, reflectance will be really high, and almost all reflectance will be due to the presence of minerals.

 - When exploring reflectance plots we noted some  curves with a lot of noise, this may be caused by the sensor inhability to measure of those wavelength bands.

## Leaf spectral signatures

The optical leaf profiles depend on foliar pigment type and content, as well as anatomical aspects and cellular structure. This is why we can obtain different spectral signatures from different plant species.

## Phenology

Given that plants have more than pigment that aborbs light for photosynthesizing, the phenology of the plant in a given moment will have an impact on it's spectral reflectance.

 - The health or senescence sequence of a leaf can be deduced from its spectral characteristics.

## Vegetation indexes

A vegetation index is a single number that quantifies vegetation biomass and/or plant vigor for each pixel in a remote sensing image. Every inedx is basically a certain combination (formula) of the sensor-measured reflectance properties, i.e. water content, chlorophyll content, pigment among others.

An example of this indexes is the **NDVI** (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) ranges from +1.0 to -1.0.

 - Areas withoud vegetation as bare rocks, sand or snow show very low NDVI values (from 0.1 or less).
 - Sparse vegetation such as shrubs, grasslands or senescing crops show moderate NDVI values (from 0.2 to 0.5)
 - Dense vegetation found in tropical and temperate forest shows high NDVI values (from 0.6 to 0.9)

Another example is how healthy or stressed the vegetation is and the NDVI values.

 - A healthy plant could have an NDVI value of .72 and the reflectance will be composed by 50% NIR and 8% RED
 - A stressed plant could show and NDVI of 0.14 and the reflectance will be composed by 40% NIR and 30% RED.
 - Stressed plant will have a bigger composition of its reflectance from RED and lower representation of the NIR.

# Specular vs diffuse reflectance

There are two types of reflectances:

 - Specular: The angle of th incident ray is the same as the reflected ray. This one can be driven by the waxes of the leaves.
 - Diffuse (Lambertian): The angle of the reflected ray is isotropic (uniform in all directions)

# Minerals

Their spectra is going to be defined by their elements composition

 - Is controlled by electronic processes
 - The absorption is driven by the change in balance state due to irradiation
 - Location of absorption bands is based on the presence of various (typically matellic) elements
 - Electronic absorption features are found typically in the UV VIS parts of the spectrum

When you are working with minerals, you are looking for emissivity, that's why the LWIR is used rather than the visible spectrum (There is a lot of aborbance in this region.

Absorbtion features are caused by two processes:

 - Electronic processes: You can detect this ones on the Visible Near Infraredd
 - Vibrational processes: This ones are more intense. It's more about the chemistry. You can detect this in the Short/Long Wave Infrared.

## Data analysis

 - Continuum removal / convex-hull: Is a normalization process for absoprtion features that allows the comparison of spectra adquire by different instruments or under different ligth conditions




 



# Another useful references
 - [https://www.earthdatascience.org/tags/remote-sensing/](https://www.earthdatascience.org/tags/remote-sensing/)

 - [Definition of radiometric resolution from NRCAN](https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/maps-tools-and-publications/satellite-imagery-and-air-photos/tutorial-fundamentals-remote-sensing/satellites-and-sensors/radiometric-resolution/9379)

 - [https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/maps-tools-and-publications/satellite-imagery-and-air-photos/tutorial-fundamentals-remote-sensing/satellites-and-sensors/spectral-resolution/9393](https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/maps-tools-and-publications/satellite-imagery-and-air-photos/tutorial-fundamentals-remote-sensing/satellites-and-sensors/spectral-resolution/9393)

 - [Several definitions of spectral reflectance](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/earth-and-planetary-sciences/spectral-reflectance)

 - [Multispectral information in context](https://www.earthdatascience.org/courses/earth-analytics/multispectral-remote-sensing-data/introduction-multispectral-imagery-r/)

 - [NDVI foundation](https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/eros/phenology/science/ndvi-foundation-remote-sensing-phenology?qt-science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects)
